README.md, before:

Contents
========
- Overview
- Software Dependencies
- Standard Setup
- Manual Setup

    - Creating the Environment
    - Installing Software Dependencies
    - Completing the Installation
    
- Activating the Virtual Environment
- Deactivating the Virtual Environment
- Using the Example Notebooks
- Testing
- Supported Environments
- Contact Us


Overview
========

Sina provides a command line interface for exploring and querying data stored
using the Mnoda schema.  Once you install the software in a virtual environment,
using the standard or manual process described below, you are ready to use the
tools.  Each time you log in you'll first need to activate the environment.
When you're done, we recommend you deactivate the virtual environment to get
back to your default environment or end your session.


Software Dependencies
=====================

Requirements files are provided to help set up your initial virtual environment
whether you are using the standard or manual installation processes.  The files
are::

- Basic requirements:  [requirements.txt](requirements.txt)
- Web requirements:  [web_requirements.txt](web_requirements.txt)


LC Setup
========

If you're on an LC machine, you can use a virtual environment with dependencies
already installed::

    $ source /collab/usr/gapps/wf/releases/sina

Sina will now be available for use via Python virtual environment, and can be
tested with `sina -h` (which should display a help message). When you're done,
use `deactivate` to exit the virtual environment. If you run into issues,
please email us at siboka@llnl.gov.


Local Setup
===========

Standard installation, provided by the Makefile, is initiated by entering
the following at the command line::

    $ make

This command creates the virtual environment, installs \(missing\) dependencies,
and installs Sina.

You can build the documentation, which will appear in `build/docs`, using::

    $ make docs

Test are run by entering::

    $ make tests

Finally, Web dependencies can be installed using::

    $ make web_deps

Alternatively, you can install, build, and run all of the above by entering
the following::

    $ make all

Once installation is complete you are ready to activate the environment -- see
"Activating the Virtual Environment" -- and begin using Sina.


Manual Setup
============

You will need to create, activate, and install software dependencies in your
environment.


Creating the Environment
------------------------
Enter the following command to set up your initial environment::

    $ python -m virtualenv venv   # venv can be any name you want

Now activate the environment \(see "Activating the Virtual Environment"\)
before proceeding to install dependencies.


Installing Software Dependencies
--------------------------------
Enter the following command to install basic Sina dependencies::

    $(venv) pip install -r requirements.txt

Access to a locally-hosted version of Sina's web content is provided
with the following command::

    $(venv) pip install -r web-requirements.txt

Should installation problems arise for dependency packages (e.g., django) you
will want to comment out the `--no-index` option in the corresponding
requirements file and try again. Excluding this option tells pip to look for
the associated dependencies in the Python Package Index.

Note that multiple requirements files can be provided on a single line, for
example::

    $(venv) pip install -r requirements.txt -r web-requirements.txt


Completing the Installation
---------------------------
The requirements files should install the package in editable mode but, if
not, you can install the package via::

    $(venv) pip install -e .


Activating the Virtual Environment
==================================
Enter the following command to enter the virtual environment::

    $ source venv/bin/activate    # for csh use activate.csh

You will need to do this every time you want to start up a session in the named
virtual environment.


Deactivating the Virtual Environment
====================================
Enter the following command to deactivate the virtual environment::

    $(venv) deactivate

when you are done.


Using the Example Notebooks
===========================

Sina contains Jupyter notebooks that demonstrate how to use it with
sample datasets. Files can be found in the examples directory, and are
organized by dataset, with data_overview.rst containing descriptions of each
set. To use the notebooks, you'll first need to run getting_started.ipynb
(also in the examples directory) from the LC Jupyter server at
lc.llnl.gov/jupyter. After that, you'll be ready to run the rest of the notebooks.
To clean all output from the notebooks::

  $(venv) make clean-notebooks


Testing
=======

This package uses nosetests to run unit tests.  Enter the following while in
your virtual environment::

    $(venv) nosetests

Additional tests, which include checks for PEP8 compliance and proper
documentation, can be run my entering the following::

    $ make tests

This command will set up and enter the necessary virtual environment.


Supported Environments
======================

Sina is regularly tested in the following environments:

- **OSX 10.13**: Primary development environment for most team members.
  If you are not on the LC network, be sure to comment out `--no-index` in the
  requirements file.
- **TOSS 3, RedHat 7.4 (quartz, rzsonar)**: Automated testing environment
- **TOSS 3, RedHat 7.5 (catalyst, rztopaz)**: Secondary development environment

Absence is not an indication that Sina will not work; please consider expanding this list!


Contact Us
==========

Feel free to contact us at siboka@llnl.gov if you have questions or want to
add to our list of supported environments.


Updated: 7/17/2018

Commit message:

SIBO-445: Change deploy symlink to sina instead of sina/venv/bin/activate

README.md, after:

Contents
========
- Overview
- Software Dependencies
- Standard Setup
- Manual Setup

    - Creating the Environment
    - Installing Software Dependencies
    - Completing the Installation

- Activating the Virtual Environment
- Deactivating the Virtual Environment
- Using the Example Notebooks
- Testing
- Supported Environments
- Contact Us


Overview
========

Sina provides a command line interface for exploring and querying data stored
using the Mnoda schema.  Once you install the software in a virtual environment,
using the standard or manual process described below, you are ready to use the
tools.  Each time you log in you'll first need to activate the environment.
When you're done, we recommend you deactivate the virtual environment to get
back to your default environment or end your session.


Software Dependencies
=====================

Requirements files are provided to help set up your initial virtual environment
whether you are using the standard or manual installation processes.  The files
are::

- Basic requirements:  [requirements.txt](requirements.txt)
- Web requirements:  [web_requirements.txt](web_requirements.txt)


LC Setup
========

If you're on an LC machine, you can use a virtual environment with dependencies
already installed::

    $ source /collab/usr/gapps/wf/releases/sina/bin/activate

(The above is for bash; other activation scripts, ex: activate.fish, can be found
in the same directory.)

Sina will now be available for use via Python virtual environment, and can be
tested with `sina -h` (which should display a help message). When you're done,
use `deactivate` to exit the virtual environment. If you run into issues,
please email us at siboka@llnl.gov.


Local Setup
===========

Standard installation, provided by the Makefile, is initiated by entering
the following at the command line::

    $ make

This command creates the virtual environment, installs \(missing\) dependencies,
and installs Sina.

You can build the documentation, which will appear in `build/docs`, using::

    $ make docs

Test are run by entering::

    $ make tests

Finally, Web dependencies can be installed using::

    $ make web_deps

Alternatively, you can install, build, and run all of the above by entering
the following::

    $ make all

Once installation is complete you are ready to activate the environment -- see
"Activating the Virtual Environment" -- and begin using Sina.


Manual Setup
============

You will need to create, activate, and install software dependencies in your
environment.


Creating the Environment
------------------------
Enter the following command to set up your initial environment::

    $ python -m virtualenv venv   # venv can be any name you want

Now activate the environment \(see "Activating the Virtual Environment"\)
before proceeding to install dependencies.


Installing Software Dependencies
--------------------------------
Enter the following command to install basic Sina dependencies::

    $(venv) pip install -r requirements.txt

Access to a locally-hosted version of Sina's web content is provided
with the following command::

    $(venv) pip install -r web-requirements.txt

Should installation problems arise for dependency packages (e.g., django) you
will want to comment out the `--no-index` option in the corresponding
requirements file and try again. Excluding this option tells pip to look for
the associated dependencies in the Python Package Index.

Note that multiple requirements files can be provided on a single line, for
example::

    $(venv) pip install -r requirements.txt -r web-requirements.txt


Completing the Installation
---------------------------
The requirements files should install the package in editable mode but, if
not, you can install the package via::

    $(venv) pip install -e .


Activating the Virtual Environment
==================================
Enter the following command to enter the virtual environment::

    $ source venv/bin/activate    # for csh use activate.csh

You will need to do this every time you want to start up a session in the named
virtual environment.


Deactivating the Virtual Environment
====================================
Enter the following command to deactivate the virtual environment::

    $(venv) deactivate

when you are done.


Using the Example Notebooks
===========================

Sina contains Jupyter notebooks that demonstrate how to use it with
sample datasets. Files can be found in the examples directory, and are
organized by dataset, with data_overview.rst containing descriptions of each
set. To use the notebooks, you'll first need to run getting_started.ipynb
(also in the examples directory) from the LC Jupyter server at
lc.llnl.gov/jupyter. After that, you'll be ready to run the rest of the notebooks.
To clean all output from the notebooks::

  $(venv) make clean-notebooks


Testing
=======

This package uses nosetests to run unit tests.  Enter the following while in
your virtual environment::

    $(venv) nosetests

Additional tests, which include checks for PEP8 compliance and proper
documentation, can be run my entering the following::

    $ make tests

This command will set up and enter the necessary virtual environment.


Supported Environments
======================

Sina is regularly tested in the following environments:

- **OSX 10.13**: Primary development environment for most team members.
  If you are not on the LC network, be sure to comment out `--no-index` in the
  requirements file.
- **TOSS 3, RedHat 7.4 (quartz, rzsonar)**: Automated testing environment
- **TOSS 3, RedHat 7.5 (catalyst, rztopaz)**: Secondary development environment

Absence is not an indication that Sina will not work; please consider expanding this list!


Contact Us
==========

Feel free to contact us at siboka@llnl.gov if you have questions or want to
add to our list of supported environments.


Updated: 7/17/2018
