python/docs/source/mnoda.rst, before:

.. _mnoda:

Mnoda Schema
============

Overview
--------

The Mnoda schema is a generalized JSON format for representing experimental data.
It consists of two types of JSON objects: Records, which represent the components in
an experiment (such as runs, msubs, and jobs) and Relationships, which represent
the relationships between Records. Each Mnoda document consists of a single JSON
object with arrays for Records and Relationships:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "records": [],
        "relationships": []
    }


Records
-------

Every Record has, at minimum, an :code:`id` and a :code:`type` (run, msub,
etc). Records can also have :code:`data`, :code:`files`,
application metadata, arbitrary user-defined information, and more.
A minimal example of a Record:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "type": "some_type",
        "id": "myRecordName"
    }

Note that :code:`id` can be replaced by :code:`local_id`. Use :code:`local_id`
if you're not sure that all your Records will be named uniquely (:code:`local_id` must
still be unique within a JSON document).

A more fleshed-out example, with field descriptions:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      // Category of the Record. Some types (ex: run) have additional support within Sina
      "type": "some_type",
      // Local ID of the Record. Must be unique within JSON document. Will be
      // replaced by global id (or simply 'id') in db.
      "local_id": "obj1",
      // A dictionary of files associated with the Record
      "files": {
          // Each file can optionally specify a mimetype and tags.
          "foo.png": {"mimetype": "image/png", "tags": ["summary_image","output"]}
      },
      // A dictionary of data associated with the Record
      "data": {
          // Entries must have a value. Optionally, they can have tags and/or units.
          "initial_angle":: {"value": 30},
          // For units, we recommend SI with / for division and ^ for exponentiation.
          // This format may have future support in Sina.
          "max_density": { "value": 3, "units": "kg/m^3" },
          "total_energy": { "value": 12.2, "units": "MJ", "tags": ["output"]},
          // Data can be strings, scalars, lists of strings, or lists of scalars
          "revision": { "value": "12-4-11", "tags": ["pedigree"]},
          "presets": { "value": ["quickstart", "glass"]}
      },
      // A dictionary of information that does not make sense as a data or file entry
      "user_defined": {
          // None of this will be interpreted by Sina. Instead, it will simply
          // be saved as part of the Record.
          "display_string": "0x477265617420636174636821"
      }
    }


Relationships
-------------

Every Relationship is a triple involving exactly three things: a :code:`subject`,
a :code:`predicate`, and an :code:`object`. Together, they form a statement about the relation between
:code:`subject` and :code:`object`. For example, in the phrase "Alice knows Bob", "Alice" is
the :code:`subject`, "knows" is the :code:`predicate`, and "Bob" is the :code:`object`. Other examples:

  * task_1 contains run_22
  * task_1 contains run_23
  * overlay_12 corrects sample_14
  * msub_3 launches job_3

To avoid confusion, try to use the grammatical active voice when assigning predicates.
A "passive voice" :code:`predicate` like "contained by", "corrected by", or
"launched by" reverses the normal direction of relations. In the Mnoda schema,
a Relationship always consists of exactly a :code:`subject`,
:code:`predicate`, and :code:`object`, where the :code:`subject` and :code:`object`
are each the :code:`id` of a Record:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      "subject": "myTaskId",
      "predicate": "contains",
      "object": "myRunId"
    }

:code:`subject` and :code:`object` can be switched to :code:`local_subject`
and :code:`local_object`, respectively, which indicates that the :code:`id` for that field:

  * Must correspond to a Record named using a :code:`local_id` elsewhere in the document
  * Will be replaced by whatever global :code:`id` is chosen to replace the :code:`local_id` naming that Record. For example:

.. code-block:: javascript

    "records": [
      {"type": "some_type", "id": "myRecordId"},
      {"type": "run", "local_id": "run1"}
    ],

    "relationships": [
      {"subject": "myRecordId", "predicate": "summarizes", "local_object": "run1"}
    ]

When ingested by Sina, the :code:`local_id` "run1" and :code:`local_object` "run1" will both be renamed
to the same globally unique ID in order to preserve the relationship.


Special Record Types
--------------------

Certain types of Records are expected to recur in data ingested by Sina.
These types support additional fields in datastores created by Sina, and
may also support additional queries. What follows is a list of Sina's
special Record types and the fields they support. Note that **all
fields supported by generic Mnoda Records are supported by the special types**,
such as :code:`local_id`, :code:`data`, etc.

Run
~~~

A Run is a Record that represents a single "run" of code within an application.
As such, Runs **require** an application identification, and optionally take
a user and version:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      "type": "run", // Type is case-sensitive
      "id": "myRunName",
      "application": "hydro",  // The application that produced the run
      "user": "John Doe",  // The user who ran the application
      "version": "1.5-dev2",  // The application's version
      "files": [
          {"uri": "run_image_1.png", "mimetype": "png"}
      ],
      "data": {
          "final_energy": {"value": 4005.52, "units": "kJ"}
      }
    }


Complete, Empty Document
------------------------

For convenience, below is a Mnoda document template with Relationship and generic
Record fields represented. Note that :code:`datum_name` should be replaced by the
actual name of the datum (such as "density" or "max_volume").

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      "records": [
        {
          "type": "",
          "id": "",
          "files": [
              {"uri": "", "mimetype": "", "tags": []}
          ],
          "data": {
              "datum_name": {"value": "", "units": "", "tags": []}
          },
          "user_defined": {}
        },
        {
          "type": "",
          "local_id": "",
          "files": {
              "uri": {"mimetype": "", "tags": []}
          },
          "data": {
              "datum_name": {"value": [], "units": "", "tags": []}
          },
          "user_defined": {}
        }
      ],

      "relationships": [
        {
          "subject": "",
          "predicate": "",
          "object": ""
        },
        {
          "local_subject": "",
          "predicate": "",
          "local_object": ""
        }
      ]
    }

Commit message:

SIBO-682: Replace Mnoda with Sina or other appropriate phrase

python/docs/source/mnoda.rst, after:

.. _sina_schema:

Sina Schema
============

Overview
--------

The Sina schema is a generalized JSON format for representing experimental data.
It consists of two types of JSON objects: Records, which represent the components in
an experiment (such as runs, msubs, and jobs) and Relationships, which represent
the relationships between Records. Each Sina document consists of a single JSON
object with arrays for Records and Relationships:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "records": [],
        "relationships": []
    }


Records
-------

Every Record has, at minimum, an :code:`id` and a :code:`type` (run, msub,
etc). Records can also have :code:`data`, :code:`files`,
application metadata, arbitrary user-defined information, and more.
A minimal example of a Record:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
        "type": "some_type",
        "id": "myRecordName"
    }

Note that :code:`id` can be replaced by :code:`local_id`. Use :code:`local_id`
if you're not sure that all your Records will be named uniquely (:code:`local_id` must
still be unique within a JSON document).

A more fleshed-out example, with field descriptions:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      // Category of the Record. Some types (ex: run) have additional support within Sina
      "type": "some_type",
      // Local ID of the Record. Must be unique within JSON document. Will be
      // replaced by global id (or simply 'id') in db.
      "local_id": "obj1",
      // A dictionary of files associated with the Record
      "files": {
          // Each file can optionally specify a mimetype and tags.
          "foo.png": {"mimetype": "image/png", "tags": ["summary_image","output"]}
      },
      // A dictionary of data associated with the Record
      "data": {
          // Entries must have a value. Optionally, they can have tags and/or units.
          "initial_angle":: {"value": 30},
          // For units, we recommend SI with / for division and ^ for exponentiation.
          // This format may have future support in Sina.
          "max_density": { "value": 3, "units": "kg/m^3" },
          "total_energy": { "value": 12.2, "units": "MJ", "tags": ["output"]},
          // Data can be strings, scalars, lists of strings, or lists of scalars
          "revision": { "value": "12-4-11", "tags": ["pedigree"]},
          "presets": { "value": ["quickstart", "glass"]}
      },
      // A dictionary of information that does not make sense as a data or file entry
      "user_defined": {
          // None of this will be interpreted by Sina. Instead, it will simply
          // be saved as part of the Record.
          "display_string": "0x477265617420636174636821"
      }
    }


Relationships
-------------

Every Relationship is a triple involving exactly three things: a :code:`subject`,
a :code:`predicate`, and an :code:`object`. Together, they form a statement about the relation between
:code:`subject` and :code:`object`. For example, in the phrase "Alice knows Bob", "Alice" is
the :code:`subject`, "knows" is the :code:`predicate`, and "Bob" is the :code:`object`. Other examples:

  * task_1 contains run_22
  * task_1 contains run_23
  * overlay_12 corrects sample_14
  * msub_3 launches job_3

To avoid confusion, try to use the grammatical active voice when assigning predicates.
A "passive voice" :code:`predicate` like "contained by", "corrected by", or
"launched by" reverses the normal direction of relations. In the Sina schema,
a Relationship always consists of exactly a :code:`subject`,
:code:`predicate`, and :code:`object`, where the :code:`subject` and :code:`object`
are each the :code:`id` of a Record:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      "subject": "myTaskId",
      "predicate": "contains",
      "object": "myRunId"
    }

:code:`subject` and :code:`object` can be switched to :code:`local_subject`
and :code:`local_object`, respectively, which indicates that the :code:`id` for that field:

  * Must correspond to a Record named using a :code:`local_id` elsewhere in the document
  * Will be replaced by whatever global :code:`id` is chosen to replace the :code:`local_id` naming that Record. For example:

.. code-block:: javascript

    "records": [
      {"type": "some_type", "id": "myRecordId"},
      {"type": "run", "local_id": "run1"}
    ],

    "relationships": [
      {"subject": "myRecordId", "predicate": "summarizes", "local_object": "run1"}
    ]

When ingested by Sina, the :code:`local_id` "run1" and :code:`local_object` "run1" will both be renamed
to the same globally unique ID in order to preserve the relationship.


Special Record Types
--------------------

Certain types of Records are expected to recur in data ingested by Sina.
These types support additional fields in datastores created by Sina, and
may also support additional queries. What follows is a list of Sina's
special Record types and the fields they support. Note that **all
fields supported by generic Sina Records are supported by the special types**,
such as :code:`local_id`, :code:`data`, etc.

Run
~~~

A Run is a Record that represents a single "run" of code within an application.
As such, Runs **require** an application identification, and optionally take
a user and version:

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      "type": "run", // Type is case-sensitive
      "id": "myRunName",
      "application": "hydro",  // The application that produced the run
      "user": "John Doe",  // The user who ran the application
      "version": "1.5-dev2",  // The application's version
      "files": {
          "run_image_1.png": {"mimetype": "png"}
      },
      "data": {
          "final_energy": {"value": 4005.52, "units": "kJ"}
      }
    }


Complete, Empty Document
------------------------

For convenience, below is a Sina document template with Relationship and generic
Record fields represented. Note that :code:`datum_name` should be replaced by the
actual name of the datum (such as "density" or "max_volume").

.. code-block:: javascript

    {
      "records": [
        {
          "type": "",
          "id": "",
          "files": [
              {"uri": "", "mimetype": "", "tags": []}
          ],
          "data": {
              "datum_name": {"value": "", "units": "", "tags": []}
          },
          "user_defined": {}
        },
        {
          "type": "",
          "local_id": "",
          "files": {
              "uri": {"mimetype": "", "tags": []}
          },
          "data": {
              "datum_name": {"value": [], "units": "", "tags": []}
          },
          "user_defined": {}
        }
      ],

      "relationships": [
        {
          "subject": "",
          "predicate": "",
          "object": ""
        },
        {
          "local_subject": "",
          "predicate": "",
          "local_object": ""
        }
      ]
    }
